In this video, we'll learn more about
function parameters, and we'll also
talk about the return statement.
When we call a function and pass
data into that function, this data
are the parameters to that function.
In the function call, these
data are called arguments.
In the function definition,
they're called parameters.
We'll define the vocabulary more
precisely in the next slide.
As we've already seen, when we call
a function, the arguments we use to
call the function and the parameters
that the function expects must
match in number, order and type.
Let's see an example.
In this example, we have a function
prototype that tells the compiler
that we'll define a function
named add numbers that expects two
integers and returns an integer.
Then in the main, I declare an
integer variable named result,
and we initialize it to 0.
Then we call the add numbers
function and pass in the
integer literals 100 and 200.
The compiler will type check this
function call to be sure it's valid.
Since I'm passing in two integers
and the function prototype says
exactly that, then the compiler
will not produce an error.
You can see at the bottom of
the slide, that I've defined
the add numbers function.
It has two integer
parameters, a and b.
In the case of the function call in
main, a will be 100
and b will be 200.
100 plus 200 is computed
and 300 is returned.
The 300 is then assigned to the
variable result in the main function.
Let's take a look at another example.
In this example, I didn't provide
a function prototype to save space.
But you should know at this
point that it would be void
say hello standard string.
Notice that the function say
hello expects one parameter,
and it's a c++ string object.
And it displays hello followed by
whatever string is in the name object.
The next three statements
would normally be in
main on another function.
These are the function calls.
The first is say hello Frank.
Notice that frank is a c-style
string literal, but the function
expects a c++ string object.
Aren't these types different.
Why doesn't the compiler
produce an error here.
Yes, the types are different.
But the compiler will try to convert
one type to another if it knows
how to make the function call work.
In this case the, c-style string
literal Frank is converted
to a c++ string object.
The same would happen if a
function expected a double
and I passed an intent to it.
The int would be promoted to the
double as we've already seen.
Notice the last function call.
In this case, I'm calling the
function say hello with a single
string object parameter, my dog,
which is a variable name for a string
object with the string buster in it.
Let's talk a bit about how
parameters are passed into functions.
In c++, when you pass data into a
function that data is passed by value.
What this means is that the value
of the data is passed in by copy.
So the compiler makes
a copy of the data.
That means that the code in the
function does not change the
argument that was passed in.
When we finished the function,
the original data that was in the
function call will be unchanged.
This is good and not so good.
It's good because since we're making
a copy, we can't change the original
argument by mistake or intentionally.
It's not good because sometimes
making a copy of data can be expensive
both in storage needed and in time
needed to actually copy that data.
Also, sometimes we really
do want to change the
actual data being passed in.
Fear not, c++ has solutions
for all these use cases, and
we'll learn about them soon.
Let's define some vocabulary used
in programming languages, that is
formal versus actual parameters.
Formal parameters are the
parameters defined in the function's
definition, in the function header.
Actual parameters are the
parameters that are used when
the function is called that is
in the function call statement.
Many programmers and languages
call actual parameters the
arguments to a function.
In c++, the actual parameters
are passed by value or copied
to the formal parameters.
Let me show you an example
that will make this clear.
In this slide, I have a
function definition for a
function called param test.
And this function expects
one parameter called formal.
This is an example of
a formal parameter.
If this function expected more
than one parameter, they would all
be considered formal parameters.
In the main function, I'm
declaring an integer named
actual and initializing it to 50.
I'm displaying actual
which will display 50.
Then I'm calling the param test
function with the actual parameter.
This is the function call.
Any parameters passed to functions
here are considered actual parameters.
In this case, the value of
the actual parameter is copied
to the formal parameter.
So formal in the param test
function will have the value 50.
But it's at a different
location in memory than the
actual since a copy was made.
I then display formal and param
tests, so 50 is displayed.
Then I assign 100 to formal
and display it again.
So you see 100 is displayed.
Now the function is done,
and we return back to
main, and we print actual.
Actual will still be 50.
It was never changed because
param test was working
with a copy all along.
It's very important that you
understand the concept of pass
by value since it's critical
to understanding functions.
Let's talk about the function
return statement next.
As we've already seen, if a
function is defined as returning
a value of a specific type, then
the function must return a value of
that type using a return statement.
We've already seen a few examples
of this, and we've been doing it
in the main function all along.
If the function return type is void,
then the return statement is optional.
A return statement can occur
anywhere in the function body,
but you usually see it as the last
statement of the function body.
The return statement immediately
terminates the function.
It's possible to have multiple
return statements in a function
depending on the logic in your code.
However, this is not a best practice.
You typically want a
single return statement.
Remember, having multiple
break statements in a loop
and the potential problems you
could have with readability.
Well, the same is true with multiple
return statements and functions.
Finally, if the function
returns a value, then this value
becomes the result of the code
that's called the function.
Let's head over to the IDE and
see some examples of parameter
passing and pass by value.
Okay, I'm in the IDE, and I'm
in the section 11 workspace in
the function parameters project.
In this example, what I'd like to do
is go over some simple function calls
that pass in parameters by value.
And I want to make the point and
hopefully you'll understand that those
by value parameters do not change.
That's really important to understand.
So I've got four
function prototypes here.
The first one is called pass
by value one, the second is
called pass by value two.
And the first one just expects
an integer, the second one
expects a c++ string object.
The pass by value three function
expects a vector of string objects.
And the last one print vector
just prints out a vector.
So if you send it a vector
of strings it displays all
the strings in the vector.
Okay, o let's look at it the
first one, pass by value one.
It expects a number and the
parameter name for that number is
num, that's the formal parameter.
And all I'm doing is
changing num to a 1000.
Really, really simple.
So let's look at my main.
In my main, I've got num, which is 10.
And I'm simply saying num before
calling about pass by value 1 is
hopefully, that'll print out a
10, right, that's what we expect.
Then I'm going to call pass
by value, and I'm going to
pass into it num, which is 10.
Remember, pass by value 1
changes that value to a 1000.
And then I come back and i
print out that number again.
Now you may think that we're going
to get a 1000, here but we're not.
It's passed by value.
So we actually passed in
a copy to that function.
So the function was changing the copy,
not the actual which is this num here.
So let me run this, and then I'll walk
you through exactly what's going on.
You can see here none before calling
10, num after calling still 10.
Okay, so let's talk about that.
Remember, num is equal to
10 and it's in my main.
So in this case, here's
my main function.
And it's got a local variable
in there called num, and
we initialized it to 10.
Then we called this
function right here.
So this would be passed by value one.
And I'll just call it one.
Okay, just to save some writing time.
So that's passed by by value one.
And it expects an integer num.
So it's got its own copy of num.
That's the formal parameter.
And at this point, the 10
gets copied over to num.
Okay, now I'm going
to set num to a 1000.
Remember, this num right here
refers to that guy, not this one.
So I'm changing the local num,
the formal parameter to a 1000.
So I'm just changing
this one to a 1000.
I never touched this one.
Now this function is finished.
So this function is now finished.
This is gone and, I'll talk
about what gone means in a couple
of videos when I talk about
activation records and the stack.
That's it. Now we return.
And in the main, we display
num, well num never changed.
Remember, this was an
absolute copy of it.
And so hopefully, that makes
sense with pass by value.
Let me show you another example.
Here we've got another
num, which is 20.
So don't get confused with the names.
I could use any name I want
in that formal parameter.
I just chose num to make a point.
In this case, it's another num.
So when we pass -- when we print
here, we're going to print to 20, then
we're going to call pass by value 1
again and pass in that num, so the 20
gets copied to the formal parameter.
We change it to a thousand.
Again, we change that local copy.
And when we come back, we
still have a 20, right.
We never touched the actual.
So let me run this.
And now, we're going to see 10 10
and 20 20, just what we expect.
It's no different
when you use objects.
So in this case, I'll
uncomment that code.
In this case, you can see
that I've got a string, a c++
string object called name.
And I've initialized it to Frank.
And then before I call pass by
value 2, I'm going to display it.
That's going to display Frank.
Then I'm going to pass that
string object into pass by value
2, which is another function,
and that function is right here.
It's going to change its
parameter to change, whatever
was there before is now changed.
And then when I come back,
I'm printing out name again.
Name has not changed because that
changed here, changed a copy.
Okay, so let's walk
through this one again.
So what do we have.
We have main,
we've got the main function, and it's got a variable
called name, and it's Frank.
Okay, then we called pass by value 2.
So this would be passed by
value 2, and it has a parameter,
right, a formal parameter, which
is a variable, it's called s.
And we copied Frank in there.
So right now this becomes Frank.
Now we say s is changed.
So we get rid of Frank, and
we replaced it with changed.
And again, these are all
strings, string objects.
Now we return back to main,
this function is now done.
I never changed the name because
I never even knew about it.
I was working with a
local copy all along.
Okay, so it's same thing with
integers as with objects.
So in this case, if I run this
program, you can see the name before
calling pass by value 2 is Frank.
And the name after calling
pass by value 2 is Frank.
Again, it hasn't changed.
All right, let's do one more
just to drive this point home.
This is really important that you
understand what's going on here.
In this example, I'm using
a vector of string objects.
I don't think we've used a
vector of string objects.
We basically used, I think,
vectors of integers and doubles.
We can have a vector of anything.
So here, we're saying that
stooges is a vector of strings.
And the strings in that vector
are Larry, Moe and Curly.
So I'm printing out stooges
before calling pass by value 3.
And I'm calling this function
called print vector that just
prints out those strings in that
vector, whatever they happen to be.
Then I'm calling pass by value 3,
and I'm passing in stooges and then
I'm just printing it out again.
Okay, so let me run this first,
and then we'll walk through it.
So you can see that before calling
the function: Larry, Moe and Curly.
After calling that should say,
after right there, after calling
the function Larry, Moe and Curly.
Okay, so let me change that and
make that correct that way.
When you guys see it in the resources,
you'll know what I'm talking about.
So let me run that again.
Okay, so before calling Larry
Moe Curly, after calling
Larry Moe curly.
So let's walk through this example.
Here is the function pass by value 3.
So in this case what have I got?
Well, I've got my main, and my
main has the stooges variable,
which is a vector of strings.
In this case, it's
Larry Moe and Curly.
These are all string objects.
Right now, I call this
function right here.
And I pass in stooges to it.
So this is pass by value 3, and
it has that formal parameter v.
That could be any name we want.
Right now Larry Moe and
Curly get copied into v.
So this will be Larry Moe and Curly.
Now I execute this line
right here v.clear.
That deletes these guys.
So now v is empty.
And that's it.
Then I return back to main.
What happens?
This function is now gone.
And when I come back to main,
it still has that stooges
vector Larry Moe and Curly.
I never touched it.
Because again, I was
working with a copy.
In the next few videos, we'll learn
how to send information in so that
I can modify the actual parameters.
But it's important to understand
that by default this is the
behavior pass by value, make a copy.
Okay, so hopefully that makes sense.
And if there are any questions,
please post them on the course forums.